.TH RISE 1 "May 2026" "rise 0.2" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
rise \- small Ada-first privilege launcher
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B rise
[\fB\-n\fR]
[\fB\-u\fR \fIuser\fR]
\fIcommand\fR
[\fIargs...\fR]
.br
.B rise
\fB\-k\fR
[\fB\-u\fR \fIuser\fR]
.br
.B rise
\fB\-C\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B rise
is a small sudo/doas-style privilege launcher. It evaluates
.IR /etc/rise.conf ,
authenticates through PAM when required, sanitizes the environment, switches
to the target user, and executes the requested command directly with
.BR execv (3).
.PP
It does not invoke a shell and does not implement sudoers or doas.conf syntax.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-u ", " \-\-user " " \fIuser\fR
Run the command as
.IR user .
The default target user is
.BR root .
.TP
.BR \-n ", " \-\-non-interactive
Do not prompt for a password. If authentication would be required and no
valid timestamp ticket exists, fail.
.TP
.BR \-k ", " \-\-forget
Forget the current cached authentication ticket for the invoking user and
target user.
.TP
.BR \-C ", " \-\-check-config
Read and parse
.I /etc/rise.conf
and report whether the syntax is accepted.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Show usage information.
.SH CONFIGURATION
The configuration file is
.IR /etc/rise.conf .
It must be owned by root and must not be writable by group or others.
.PP
The file uses INI-style sections. Rules are evaluated top-to-bottom. The first
matching rule wins. If no rule matches, access is denied.
.SS Defaults
Example:
.PP
.nf
[defaults]
format = 2
timestamp = yes
timestamp_timeout = 300
tty_tickets = yes
require_tty = no
jokes = on
secure_path = /usr/local/sbin:/usr/local/bin:/usr/sbin:/usr/bin:/sbin:/bin
env_keep = TERM,COLORTERM,LANG,LC_*
.fi
.TP
.B timestamp
Enable or disable cached authentication tickets.
.TP
.B timestamp_timeout
Ticket lifetime in seconds.
.TP
.B tty_tickets
When enabled, tickets are scoped by terminal, falling back to session id when
no terminal exists and
.B require_tty
is disabled.
.TP
.B require_tty
Require a tty for PAM authentication and timestamp tickets.
.TP
.B secure_path
Path used to resolve command names and to set the final PATH.
.TP
.B env_keep
Comma-separated environment names or prefix patterns to preserve after validation.
.SS Rules
Example:
.PP
.nf
[rule wheel-root]
action = allow
who = group:wheel
target = root
auth = pam
persist = default
cmd = any
.fi
.TP
.B action
Either
.B allow
or
.BR deny .
.TP
.B who
A comma-separated list of principals:
.BI user: name
or
.BI group: name .
.TP
.B target
Target account list, or
.BR any .
.TP
.B auth
Either
.B pam
or
.BR none .
Use
.B none
only with narrow command allowlists.
.TP
.B persist
.BR default ,
.BR yes ,
or
.BR no .
Controls whether successful PAM authentication writes a timestamp ticket.
.TP
.B timeout
Optional rule-specific timestamp timeout in seconds.
.TP
.B cmd
.B any
or a comma-separated list of absolute executable paths.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/rise.conf
Main policy file.
.TP
.I /etc/pam.d/rise
PAM service configuration.
.TP
.I /run/rise/tickets
Root-owned timestamp ticket directory.
.SH SECURITY NOTES
.B rise
is designed to fail closed. It refuses symlinked configs, group/other-writable
configs, relative command paths containing slashes, and arbitrary environment
inheritance.
.PP
No short program becomes trustworthy merely by existing. Audit it, test it,
and keep rules boring.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR pam (8),
.BR execv (3),
.BR sudo (8),
.BR doas (1)
